# Research-PROJECT4_2024
Enhanced Feature Selection for Imbalanced Microarray Cancer Gene Classification Using Chaotic Salp Swarm Algorithm 
Abstract: The healthcare sector faces a persistent need for intelligent solutions to handle vast data, yet challenges resulting from data complexity often hinder effectiveness despite innovative techniques. These challenges encompasses substantial storage requirements, computational complexities, and suboptimal performance, among others. Furthermore, the high volume of features can exacerbate the effects of data imbalance, making it more difficult to discern meaningful patterns or relationships, especially in the minority class. Various methodologies, including brute force and heuristic approaches, have been proposed but are often infeasible and produce suboptimal results. Thus, techniques inspired by natural phenomena with global search abilities are developed. Among these, the Salp Swarm Algorithm (SSA) stands out, inspired by the collective behavior of salps in oceans. Despite SSA's effectiveness in optimizing Feature Selection (FS) and mitigating challenges in large datasets, it has limitations, especially in search space exploration. These limitations may stem from using pseudo-random numbers for population and control parameter initialization. In this study, we addressed these limitations by first handling the imbalanced nature of the employed microarray cancer gene datasets using the Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE). Also, we enhanced SSA's population and control parameter’s initialization through the integration of the sinusoidal chaotic map renowned for its ability to generate diverse initial solutions, thus facilitating the exploration of solution spaces. Subsequently, the improved SSA was strategically combined with the filtration capabilities of the Chi-square and Mutual Information to select the performing genes. Leveraging the efficiency, simplicity, and less computational cost of these filter methods, a joint selection of top-performing genes from the Ovarian, Colon, and Leukemia benchmark datasets was carried out. Additionally, guided by the operational principles of the proposed methodology, a more efficient determination and selection of reduced gene subsets based on a minimum error from the initial joint gene subset derived from the filter methods was performed. To validate the proposed approach for high-dimensional microarray cancer gene selection, we compared it with existing state of art gene selection  methods using the accuracy, F1 score, and gene counts metrics. The results show that our method is competitive, especially in accuracy and F1 score, across all datasets. This study promises to improve cancer diagnosis and treatment, enhancing patient outcomes and healthcare delivery.

Keywords: Salp Swarm Algorithm (SSA), Filter Methods, Microarray Cancer Gene Selection, Imbalance Data, High Dimensional Data
